But the boy did not come back.  He ran until his lungs burned, crying, until suddenly he realized he was very far away from where he had begun.  He had run through the town and was heading south down the road, the same direction as the creek current flowed.  There were fewer houses now, and more trees.  He walked to one and sat down beside it.  He was very sad.  He felt upset with himself for having yelled at the man, because he knew that the man had been kind to him.  He did not know what he would do if no one would help him.  There was very far to go, and he did not know how to get there.  But he knew the mountains were to the west, because he could, where there were not so many trees, see the peaks of them in the distance.  And he knew that if he stayed here, soon the man’s words would sound very true to him.  Already he was afraid they were true enough, that he was young and needed someone to take care of him and that he would never find his sister this way.  But he had decided.

He thought of a plan, though it was not a good one, and it did not make him very happy.  He would wait until it was late, late enough that everyone had gone to bed.  He would sneak into the inn, and he would take three loaves of bread.  He would leave his sister’s shoes as payment, because he did not want to steal, and when he found her, she could have his shoes anyway, if she needed them.  With the three loaves of bread, and maybe a little cheese since shoes were worth more than bread he thought, he would set out west toward the mountains.  He had seen a little trail that that seemed to lead west, and one that someone must use often enough for it to not be covered back in brush.  He would try.  He had to.  I can’t give up, he thought to himself.  Not so quickly as that.

He had to wait much longer than he expected before everyone in the inn went to sleep.  It was much later than he was used to being awake, and by the time he was able to sneak in to take the bread, he was only just able to keep his eyes open.  He couldn’t imagine that he would make it very far tonight, the woods were dark and he was very, very sleepy.  But he had made his mind up, and so he took the bread, and with a bit of charcoal from the hearth, he wrote on the ground “For the bread”, and left the shoes neatly next to it.  He wrapped the bread in the blanket and he left as quietly as he could, and walked through the empty streets toward the little trail.

In the dark it took him longer to find it than he thought it would, so long in fact that it was beginning to get light.  He was worried that if he didn’t find it soon, someone might see him, and know he had taken the bread, and that they might make him stay.  He worried too because a little bit of him thought that it would be alright if they found him, and that it would be rather nice to have a bed to sleep in, and someone to look after him.  But just before dawn he found the trail, and he set off down it.  He did not expect to make it very far, just enough that he could slip off into the woods and find a place to sleep.  He had made his start, and that was important, but his eyes were blurring and his steps were growing less sure.  Just as the sun was coming up he found a small bed of leaves, and in the coming light, he fell asleep.

Much later he started awake, hot, the sun high overhead, his blanket beside him wrapped around the bread, his jacket on top of it.  He had fallen asleep with it on, but must have taken it off as the sun rose.  He was glad he did, it was now very warm.  It was noon at least, and there were a few voices from the village carrying to him here.  He could not hear what they were saying, but he realized he must not have gotten very far at all if he could still hear people talking.  He sat up and unwrapped the bread, and tore a small piece off.  He didn’t want to waste it by eating too much so early on, but he was hungry, and he had a long way to walk today.  When he’d eaten, he stood up, took his jacket and his blanket, and he started off down the trail.

The boy walked.  He walked and he walked, for hours.  He couldn’t tell if he was really getting closer to the mountains or not.  He thought that he must be, he had walked a long way, but the trees were tall and they grew thickly, and he could scarcely see the sky, much less the horizon.  There was a stream near the trail, and he decided that must have been why they put the trail here in the first place.  It was very fortunate for him.  He had not considered bringing a skin to drink from, and he would have had to turn back for water by now if it hadn’t been nearby.  As it was, he had walked to it a few times already when he would get thirsty, and he had spent more than a little of the trip walking near its banks rather than on the trail, because it was nicer near the water.  Still, he kept the trail in sight just in case the two did diverge, though really if they did, he thought he would rather stick with the water than the dust.

Night came and he slept, and day came again and he walked.  He was lonely and he was tired and he was more than a little scared and sad.  He thought of his sister, where she could be by now, hoping she was safe.  He wondered about the man who had taken her, and why, and whether he had made her sick himself, or if he was truly helping as they had said.  He wondered why the healers in the town couldn’t do more, and what they had meant by some of the stranger things they had said, about it not being a normal kind of sickness.  He wondered too if he had made a mistake, if she was too far away for him to reach now, if he had any chance of making it across the mountains on his own.  He sat down to have lunch.  He’d eaten one whole loaf of bread already while walking yesterday, and he was worried that he wouldn’t have enough to last.  But he was hungry, and there was so much walking.  When he was nearly finished, there came the sound of whistling from just down the trail back the way he’d come.  He wrapped up the bread again and ducked off the path and into the woods.  He wasn’t hiding, he thought, just being safe.  You never know who you might meet in the woods alone.

Around the corner, whistling as he walked, came an old man dragging a deer carcass along behind him on a kind of makeshift stretcher.  A dog trotted beside him, tongue lolling out of its mouth, tail bobbing happily.  The man had an worn-looking rifle strapped over his shoulders as well, and he was walking with long strides down the path.  He limped though, only slightly, as if one leg was a touch lame.  As he got to where the boy had sat for lunch he paused, and looked at the dirt.  The old man smiled, and kicked at the breadcrumbs with the toe of his boot, and looked into the trees just where the boy was hiding.  The dog sniffed at the crumbs and the footprints and looked into the trees as well.

“Someone back there?” the old man said in a friendly voice.

The boy was still and quiet, and tried to decide if he should answer the hunter.  He was very tall and looked a little fierce, but his voice was friendly.  He waited to see if the hunter would say anything else before he made up his mind.  The old man and the dog walked to the other side of the trail and pretended to look into the other side of the woods also, but the boy could tell he wasn’t serious.  He had looked right where he was crouching.  Again, his voice friendly, the old hunter said “Well, if anyone is back there and decides that they’re hungry, tired, or in need of a friend, my house is just up the trail.  If they’re able to find it, me and Gus here would be happy to help.”  And he started walking again, his pace easy but moving down the trail in long strides, pulling the deer along behind him.  The dog stayed for a moment, and looked back where the boy was crouched, and barked, and tilted his head to one side.  The old man whistled and the dog turned and trotted off down the trail behind him.  The boy waited until they had rounded another corner before walking back out onto the trail, and he thought to himself that he did, in fact, need a friend.  His bread would run out in another day, and though he wasn’t certain, he could guess that crossing the mountain would probably take more than that.  He decided to follow after the hunter and his dog, and see if perhaps there was work he could do in exchange for food, and directions across the mountain.

“Hello, sir,” the boy said.  The old man was bent down tending to his garden, dog sitting by his side, watching the boy as he walked up.  “You called to me out on the road.  I’m sorry for hiding.”

The old man didn’t turn around, but waved his hand.  “No trouble, son.  Best to be cautious.  Let me finish with this, we’ll see what’s what, alright?”

The boy said “Yes sir,” and nodded, though he realized after he did it that nodding was a bit silly because the old man couldn’t see him anyway.  The dog stood up and walked over to him, and sniffed at his hands.  The boy patted him on the head and scratched his ears.  The dog sat down next to him and on his feet a little, which the boy decided was a friendly thing for the dog to do.  The old man threw a few weeds to the side, and dusted his hands off on the knees of his pants, and stood up slowly.  He seemed strong, but he was old, and a little stiff.  He rubbed at his knee.

“So, traveling on your own, are you?  Seems like this might be a bit too far to go wandering off on your own unless you have something important to do.”

“I do have something important.  I need to find my sister.”

The old man nodded thoughtfully.  “I suppose you’re going over the mountains.  That’s the only thing to do, heading this way.”

“I am, sir.”

The old man turned around and began to walk behind the house.  “Come on, I’ve got some work to do.”  The boy followed, and behind the house was a hook, where the deer was hung.  The head had been cut off, and the blood had drained out of the meat and into a bucket on the ground.  The boy had grown up in a town and not the countryside, and in the town they had butchers, and though he’d seen sides of beef and venison hung before, he’d never seen it like this.  There was a lot of blood, and it made him feel a little strange.  He sat down on the ground rather more heavily than he intended to, and the old man look behind him and chuckled.

“Sorry son, I should have warned you.”

The boy shook his head.  “I’m fine,” though his face was pale.  The old man took out a knife, and looked back at the boy.  “Needs to be gutted and skinned…  you going to be alright?”

“Yes, sir.”  He wasn’t at all sure he would be, but he didn’t want to say so to the hunter, and seem like a baby.  He was old enough to watch a deer be cleaned, since he was old enough to eat the meat, he thought.

The man set to work, and began to ask the boy questions.  Where he was from and where he was going, what his plans were for crossing the mountains.  The boy answered some of his questions, but skirted others, though he was as polite as he could be about it.  But he told the hunter about the man on the horse, and he told him a little about the dream.  He told him about the kind people in the village, but he did not say that he had run away without telling anyone.  He told him about the healers that were supposed to be on the other side of the mountain.  The man worked on the carcass of the deer, and he listened.  When he was done he began to rub salt into the meat, having cut it from the body in skillful cleaves, and he handed a small chunk to the boy.

“Come help me put these in the smoke shed,” and the boy took it.  It was slick to the touch, and still warm, but more like meat now, and less like a deer.  They walked down a little path and the old man hung the meat, and they walked back again, making a few trips to hang it all.  The man looked down at his hands, and he laughed.  “We’re both in need of a wash.  Come on.”  He led the boy back out to the trail and across toward the stream that it still followed.  They reached it and washed their hands, and the man sat down next to the bank, and pulled off his boots and put his feet in the water.  He sat there quietly for a few minutes, and the boy decided that feet in the water sounded like a good idea, and he did the same.  His legs were shorter and almost didn’t reach from the bank, but they did, just barely, and he sat there with the old man, quietly.  Eventually the old man cleared his throat.

“Well, here’s what I think.  I think you’re a mite young to be trying to cross the mountains on your own.  But it sounds like you’ve got your reasons, and if you’re going to try, then I won’t stop you.  But you won’t make it like that.  A blanket and half a loaf of stale bread won’t get you there, I don’t think.”

The boy shook his head.  “No, sir, I don’t think so either.  Not now.  The mountains are farther away than I thought, and I eat more bread than I mean to.”

The old man smiled.  “There’s another day of walking, with your short legs, to make it to the mountains.  And it’ll take days to cross, even if you know where to pass.  There’s a short way through, and it is not hard, but it’s easy to miss.  Takes some nerve too, because there are cliffs and ledges and very deep chasms all about.  You can make it, but it’s hard going.”

The boy nodded, and thought.  He had never climbed more than a tree, let alone a mountain, before.  There were only a few hills where he lived, and they were just enough to sled down in the winter, not much more.  But still, he was going to try.  He had already come a long way, and much farther than that before, with his sister.  There was nowhere to go home to, he knew, and so forward and through the mountains was as good as anywhere.  He looked at the old man.  “I will make it.”

The old man picked up his shoes and stood up, and the boy did the same.  They walked back to the house, and kicked dirt off of their feet and went inside.  There was a small fire in the hearth, and a kettle of stew cooking, the boy could smell it, and his stomach growled loudly.  The old man laughed, and put his shoes down in the corner.  He walked to the kettle and opened the lid and stirred it a bit.  The dog lifted its head from where it was lying on the ground next to the hearth, and looked at both of them, but didn’t get up.

Dinner came and went, and the old man and the boy sat at the table.  The old man described the mountain pass, how to find it, what to look for.  By the end they sat silently, the old man drank beer and the boy had a glass of cider, and they sat near the hearth, content.  Eventually, the old man spoke.

“You’ll need food, a pack, and… do you know how to fish?”

The boy’s face brightened.  “Yes sir, I can fish.”

“Good, we’ll get you hooks, and some line.”

The boy smiled, but began to think, and shook his head.  “I don’t have a way to pay you, sir.  Perhaps I can do some work for you, to earn these things.”

The old man laughed.  “No, but perhaps you can give them back to me when you come back this way with your sister.  If you need to pay me, pay me then, once you’ve used them.”

The boy did not want to take without giving, but he had nothing to give.  “I promise to return them, when I come back.”

The old man smiled.  “That is good enough for me.”

In the morning the old man had a small sack with a strap ready for the boy.  It had a few large pieces of cured meat, some hard bread, and parcel of line and hooks, and a little knife.  As the boy ate breakfast, the old man folded the boy’s blanket and put it atop the other things.  He also took a leather canteen full of water, and set it on top of the pack.  “You’ll need that for crossing the mountain.  You’ll be near the stream at times, but at others you won’t pass close by it, and you’ll be thirsty.”  He also took a piece of flint, and a bit of metal.

“Do you know how to make a fire with these?”

The boy had seen it done, but had never done it before himself.  Still, he said, “Yes sir, I can do that.”

The old man nodded and tucked them into a tinderbox, and put the whole of it in the bag near the blanket.  “In case you need to cook that fish, or in case it gets cold.”

The boy thanked him more than once, and the old man just smiled.  “I hope you find your sister, little wanderer.  She is lucky to have a brother who loves her.”

The boy wasn’t sure what to say, since he was certain all brothers must love their sisters much the same, but he nodded and thanked the old man again.

“I will return these when I find her,” he said.

Pack slung across one shoulder, canteen across the other, and the boy was on the trail once again.

The old man was right, it was another day before the boy came upon the mountains, though the foothills were rocky enough, and the slope of the trail began to increase.  There were still very many trees, but there were boulders now too, outcroppings of rock, some overgrown with moss and lichen.  The trail curved around these, but it began to wind a bit, no longer running perfectly parallel to the stream.  Still, he could hear it when he stopped and listened, so he did not worry too much.  The old man had said he would be near it, but just to be sure he would go refill his canteen whenever he had drunk very much at all.

When he did reach the mountains, at first he wasn’t sure he had, even.  It was not until the incline became very steep, and the trail noticeably harder to walk along, that he was sure he was now in the mountains at all.  The trees were still thick, though there were many more pines now, and other evergreens, than the oaks and elms he was used to at home.  He watched for the markers the old man had mentioned, but not too closely.  The old man had said the trail would end where a small hill went flat, and there would be three ways he could choose from.  He had not gotten there yet.

And then, an hour later, he was standing on just that hilltop, and there was a small clearing, as if many people had stopped here, just as he was now.  It was a nice place to stop and sit.  The stream ran just beside it, spilling over rocks, deep enough that he could see fish swimming along in the current.  There were trees about the clearing, but there was an open space overhead, and he could see the sky.  A gentle breeze was following the stream down the mountain, and it was cooler here.  Not cold, but he could feel in the air that nightfall would bring a sharper turn to the wind.  He looked at the three paths that diverged, though the one the old man had said was the fastest and best choice for him was certainly not the one he would have chosen.  It followed the stream around a dark corner, only a thin line of stone to stand on.  A man would scarcely fit on the path, much less a horse or mule, the old man had said, which is why so few people used it.  The other paths were wider and more broad, but took longer, and went much higher into the cold.

The boy wanted to stop there for the night, the clearing was calm and inviting, and the trail he had been told to use was narrow and looked slick and dangerous.  He thought that perhaps he would have a better chance in the morning, when he was rested.  But he looked about, and the sun was only just coming up overhead, and there was no real reason to stop yet.  Fear, he decided resolutely, was not a good enough reason.  He had come a long way to cross the mountains.  There was no reason to wait to begin.

With his first step onto the slick rock path, he slipped and his foot splashed into the stream.  He did not slip much and he did not fall, but his foot came away soaked and cold.  This, he thought to himself, was not a promising way to start.  He smiled though, because now, he thought, at least I have done my slipping and not fallen.  I can be less afraid of it.  And so slowly, and more carefully this time, he began to walk near the edge of the stream, on the slick rock path beside it.  Here he was in shadows, the mountain obscuring the sun.  He felt a little dizzy when he would look straight up, at how high the mountain towered above him.  It would make him wobble on his feet, and he would have to catch at the side of the rock to keep his balance.  After a few times of this, he settled on not looking up anymore, but just following the path the best he could.

The path led down as much as up, which he had not expected.  He seemed to be walking through the mountain rather than around or over it.  He walked for what seemed like a very long time.  The sunlight, such as it was, began to grow more dim, and he began to worry with increasing urgency that he would be stuck here in the mountain, on these small stones, blind at night, and creeping forward inch by inch.  Worse, that he would fall in, and in the dark not be able to find the bank, his pack weighing him down, such that he would be pulled beneath the current and drowned.  He began to worry in earnest, and his pace increased, but almost immediately he began to slip, and had to slow back down again.  He thought to himself that slipping and drowning in the daylight would be a terrible way to keep from doing much the same at night.

As it became twilight, the light behind the mountain’s bulk disappeared, and he could see only the wedge of bluish light from where the path must end.  It seemed far away, and above him, but he walked, his tired, cold hands gripping tightly to the side of the mountain.  His fingers were scratched and they bled a little, but he held on tightly anyway.  The path led up, and it became hard to climb, his shoes slipping on the rocks.  He thought that perhaps his feet would do better, and he slipped off one shoe and one sock at a time, and putting them in his sack, he rolled his pants up and tried to climb the rocks, his toes gripping between the cracks, bending forward with his hands now on the path as well, trying to hold on.  Slowly, pulling himself and pushing with his toes, he climbed up the wet path, and, just as it began to be night in earnest, he climbed out of little pass, and found himself on an open face of rock.  It was wide enough for him to lie down on, and he did so, breathing heavily, his feet and hands wet and sore from the climb.

Eventually he put his shoes and socks back on, and he set down his pack, and he walked to the edge of the rock, and realized he was atop a cliff.  It was too dark to see below, but he felt as if it must go on a long way.  He could see nothing below him.  He went back to his pack and pulled out his blanket, and a piece of dried meat and hard bread.  He ate, but though he was hungry, he thought he should not eat too much.  He didn’t know how long there was to go, and there was no wood here to make a fire.  With a little food in his belly, and feeling very tired, he put his head on his canteen and pack like a pillow, curled his blanket around him, and fell asleep.

That night he had a dream of home.  His mother and father were alive and with his sister they all were sitting at the dinner table, and they were laughing.  Then they seemed to be walking somewhere, up a very long hill.  There were trees and there was a hawk that seemed to be following them, but when he looked for it again it was gone.  His sister started a fight with him, and in the dream he was angry with her, but even in the dream it was a happy kind of angry, because she was there, and he couldn’t remember why, but he felt like this was still much better than before.  In his dream he tried to start a fire with the tinderbox, but didn’t know how to, and the sparks all fell onto the oilcloth without lighting, and then they lit but they burned the whole cloth away and he was upset that he would have to find another or use leaves from now on.  And then there was the sound of water, and the stream was moving very fast, but on it, just behind the babbling of it, he could hear a voice, and it was calling his name.  He could not tell though if he should listen.

Sun on his face, he woke to the sound of the water still in his ears.  He sat up and stretched, and put the blanket back with his things, and drank from the stream.  He walked to the edge of the cliff, and in the daylight he could see that it was indeed very far down.  There were trees in the distance below and they looked small.  He looked at the sky and the trees and the horizon and the bulk of the mountain behind him, and he closed his eyes.  A little breeze came up, and slowly it became more than a little breeze.  It was the wind, and he felt it blow through him, and though he worried it might take him over the edge, he opened his mouth and he yelled his sister’s name.  He called to her loudly on the wind, as it blew and blew, he shouted her name and the wind carried it out over the trees.  Eventually the wind died down, and he sat down on the edge and did not call out anymore.  He felt for a few moments as if he might cry, but he had cried enough already, he decided, and no one was here to see him, or to take pity on him for his tears.  So he stood up, and gathered his pack and canteen, and looked down the path.

At just that moment a hawk soared overhead, and lighted in a tree just to the side of the rock trail.  It looked at him, its head cocked to the side, and it seemed to be waiting for him.  The boy thought this was very curious, but began to walk anyway, since there was nowhere else to go.  The morning was warm, and it was pleasant, as the night had been chill.  His blanket and jacket had kept him warm enough, but tonight he would try for a fire, he thought, if there was any wood nearby.  As he caught up to the hawk, it leapt up from the branch it was on, and soared on to another tree, more than half a mile from where he stood now.  The boy thought this was even stranger, as if the hawk was leading him along.  There was nowhere for it to lead him, he could only walk on the path that was in front of him, but it was interesting nevertheless.  It took the boy almost half an hour to go that next half mile, the path was rocky and narrow, and it twisted and turned hugging the face of the mountain.  This time as he approached where the hawk was waiting, he tried to watch it, though he had to be careful to pay attention to the path as well.  Again, as he drew nearer, the hawk leapt into the air, shaking the branch beneath it, and soared a distance down the path.

The boy followed the hawk like this all day.  The hawk would move a distance away, and as the boy would approach, it would fly off again, but never so far that the boy didn’t see clearly where it had landed, and where it would wait.  The boy ate while walking, munching a bit of bread and meat, since there was nowhere to stop and rest.  His legs were tired after so many days of hiking along, but there was nothing to be done about it.  As the sun began to dip lower in the west, the boy reached the hawk again.  He thought nothing of it this time, waiting only to see where it would land next, their little game continued.  This time though the hawk did not fly.  It stared at him as he drew nearer, and as he came abreast of it, the hawk screeched at him loudly.  The boy was startled, and his foot even slipped for a moment.  He put a hand to the side of the mountain and he looked at the hawk.  The sun was golden behind it, and it looked majestic and regal, and it screeched at him again.  The boy looked behind him on the path, and ahead of him, but he could see nothing.  There was a bend coming up shortly, much like any of the others, beyond which he could not see.  He felt strangely that the hawk was warning him away, but the boy did not know what else he could do.  He couldn’t stay where he was for long, certainly not when the afternoon began to turn to evening.  He crept along the edge of the path, and tried to look around the bend, but the curve of it was too broad, and he could only see more of the path around the mountain.  The hawk leapt up from its branch but it did not fly on to the next tree.  It flew up and out of sight.  The boy felt suddenly alone, abandoned, and afraid of why the hawk would have unexpectedly screeched at him.

He walked along the path slowly, trying to peer further along as well as he could.  When he rounded the corner fully, he saw a broad and open area, much nicer and wider than the one the night before.  The stream was nearby, and there were twigs and leaves and trees.  His heart beat faster in excitement.  He would sleep very well there, he might even get a chance to build a fire, and fish a little, if he got there soon.  He thought it strange that the hawk would have screeched to warn him away from such an ideal spot.  He moved along the path more quickly, excited to have found a place to rest.

As he drew nearer, he heard a strange rumble.  It was low and deep and it made the hair on the back of his neck stand up.  He had never heard such a sound before, but something in his bones knew that it was a sound to run from.  Only there was nowhere to run to, here, only a path behind him to inch along, two day’s worth of walking in the mountains and another day in the forest between him and any help.  The low sound came again, and from behind a boulder prowled a mountain lion.  It was bigger than him, and it began to walk toward him on the path, carefully, but without stumbling.  The boy went pale with fear, and began to walk backward, keeping his eye on the large cat.  There was nothing he could do but walk backward.  The cat was coming toward him, slowly, but much more quickly than he was backing up.  The cat drew nearer, and began to growl loudly at the boy, ears back, lips pulled tight against its teeth, hissing.  The boy walked backwards, but it was not fast enough.  The cat was too close.  It raised a paw and swiped at him, claws extended.  It slashed so near him he could feel the wind of it passing.

And then there was a blur, and a screech, and the sound of an impact.  The cat screamed and slashed at the air but it was too late, it had lost its footing and was scrambling down the mountain, beginning to tumble, rolling end over end.  A rush of feathers and talons, and a screech of triumph, as the hawk flashed back up into the sky, and settled on a tree just beside the clearing.  The boy was at first too shocked to move, and then he began to laugh and cry at the same time, fear still running inside of him neck and neck with relief.  He wanted to collapse, but he could not yet, there was nowhere to do so.  So the boy kept on to the clearing, until he could stop.

When he did, he did not first collapse to laugh or cry.  The first thing he did was reach into his pack, and pull out a piece of dried meat, and extend it to the hawk.  The hawk did not do more than look at the boy, as fiercely as before.  The boy realized the hawk did not want his dried and salty food, that the hawk only ate fresh things.  The boy pulled out the line from his pack, and the hooks, and he caught a beetle, and tying the line to a stick, started fishing.  Within a few minutes he had caught a fish, though he had not expected to catch one so soon.  He pulled the fish from the water and the hook from its mouth, and he smacked the fish on the head with a rock to keep it from flipping itself back into the water.  He took the fish and set it on a rock near the stream, and he called out to the hawk.

“Thank you, hawk.  Thank you for saving my life.  I’ve caught a fish for you, if you want it.”

The hawk looked at the boy, and screeched, and dove down to where the fish was, and began to devour it.  The boy smiled, but backed away from it, because though it had saved his life, its talons were like razors and its beak could tear his eyes and hands.  The boy baited his hook and fished for another.  Soon enough he had two more, but the hawk flew back to the tree and did not seem interested.  “Well, then I will have fish,” the boy said mostly to himself.  “Only I don’t like them quite as raw as hawks do.  I’ll need to make a fire.”

After a rather more involved effort than he had expected, the boy had a small fire going, and enough wood gathered to last the night.  He found a sharp stick and stuck it down inside one of the fishes through the mouth, and cooked the fish as well as he could over the fire.  He had the little knife that the man had packed for him, and with it he cut open the steaming fish on a rock, and picked the meat from the skin and bones.  He did the same with the second, and with a little bit of bread, felt quite full and happy.  He packed his things back up, and he laid down next to the fire, and he looked up at the sky.  He could no longer see the hawk in the tree, it was too dark since evening had come, though the moon, a waxing crescent now, kept it from being so dark as it had been.  The warmth of the fire, freshly caught fish, and the weariness of so much fear and relief, almost as soon as he closed his eyes, he was asleep.

The trail the next day was not so difficult, the path wider now, and though it climbed more, he had more space to move, and could even sit down comfortably on the path when he wanted a rest.  The hawk flew with him again, much as the day before, though more casually, sometimes flying off out of site, probably to hunt, the boy thought.  It would return though regularly enough, and the boy felt a kind of peace come over him that he had not had since he first set out to find his sister.  He had faced the hardest parts, he thought to himself, and he was alive.  For the first time he thought that he might truly pass these mountains, and find her.  Unnoticed by him, he began to have a smile on his face, and his steps were more confident.  By the end of the day he had found another small clearing to sit and eat, and though it meant stopping an hour earlier than he had intended, he didn’t expect he would find a better place before the sun went down.  He caught a fish for the hawk again, and one for himself, and it took him just a little less time to make a fire.

Two more days passed like this, and suddenly he realized he was walking more down than up now, and though he was still in the mountains, he was descending out of them.  He had left behind the little stream a day back, only to find a new one beginning on this side of the mountain, again near the path.  At the end of the second day, the hawk flew very low, and stopped on a branch only a few paces from where he stood.  It tilted its head at him and blinked an eye, and stared at him for a time.  It then screeched, and leapt up from the branch and flew back toward the mountains and the peaks.  The boy nodded and waved, sorry to see his friend go, but not sad.  If the hawk was leaving, he thought, then he was truly beyond the mountains now.

After only a day’s travel west, the rocky outcroppings, the gigantic red boulders, and the craggy peaks had all but given way to flat, open meadows and tall wavy grasses.  Little copses of trees dotted the scenery, and the trail was now little more than a dirt path that split the encroaching grass.  It was strange being out in the open, he felt exposed, as if the dome of the sky and the broad horizon could watch him, perhaps were watching him.  Among the stones he had felt tiny, fleeting compared to their timelessness and scale.  Here he just felt small, as a rabbit might beneath the shadow of an eagle.

It was here in the grasslands and walking beneath the massive sky that he began to wonder where it was he was going, and what he hoped to find.  In the mountains he had been careful not to think too far ahead, each step carefully placed, each thought focused on the task of perilous rocks and stones.  In the open he could walk and think freely, letting his mind wander where it would.  He discovered that he was not as fond of this new freedom as he might have hoped.  His sister was ill, or worse, and was gone from him, perhaps out of his reach forever.  He began to have clouded thoughts, dark though the day was bright.  With too much time and latitude to wander, his concern became heightened.  For hours he would work himself into knots over what might have become of her, or what would become of him if he should be lost.  The mountains past and the danger conquered, the fear of what he had already done began to overcome him.

“What if I never find her?” he thought to himself.  “I’ve come a very long way, and have no one to look after me now.  When I am hungry I must fight for my food, and when I am tired I must warily watch where I lay my head.”  He walked to the babble of the stream, and looked into it.  “What if I am lost?  What if there are no healers here, no help?  What if the man turned a different way, and my sister has gone on to some distant land without me?”

But still he walked on down the path, stopping to sleep or to eat, and the sun beat on his face, and he felt much older than just a few weeks before.  No more a child lost in the woods, hoping his sister knew where they would find shelter and food, he could find food for himself now, and was not afraid to sleep alone under the stars.  He missed her still, very much, but he was not afraid without her, though he might be afraid of what had happened to her.  More days passed, and he walked along the trail.  Sometimes it would rain, but mostly it was clear and bright.  He was quite good and starting little fires now, just enough to cook his fish in the evenings.  He did not know what he would have done without the stream, but he did not have to.  Some afternoons he would walk to small stands of trees to gather firewood, and he would talk to the trees, just a little.  He had not seen any people in many days now, and he was more than a little lonely.  The trees seemed not to mind if he talked to them, and he felt better for doing it.

And then one afternoon, he saw a broad expanse of trees on the horizon, not just a few scattered here and there, but another forest, like the one he’d left many days before.  The path seemed to lead into it, and he brightened, for he felt that if the healers were anywhere, they would be there.  He could picture them in little wooden houses, friendly smiles wearing plain but comfortable clothes, gentle tufts of smoke from homey chimney stacks.  He imagined his sister in one of their beds, awake now but resting, someone tending to her kindly.  He picked up his pace, and though he knew he wouldn’t make it to the woods before nightfall, he was happy that soon he might find his sister, and that she might be made well.

The sun began to sink closer to the horizon, and though he wanted to press on, he knew he would just be hungry and too tired to walk tomorrow if he didn’t stop now.  He did as he had grown accustomed, and fished and built a fire and ate and slept.  That night his dreams were happy, of his sister and their meeting, but at the back of them there was something that troubled him.  A strange impression that something was wrong, that there was some mistake, and though he woke with a smile, it was not without an insistent worry.  He stood and went to the stream to wash his face and drink.  But when he turned around, a strange thing had happened.  His pack was gone.  His knife, his line and hooks, his blanket, all gone.  A shot of panic went through him, and he began to cast about for his belongings.  He was alone in the wilderness, without them, he didn’t know what he would do.  He saw a rustle in the grass, and he darted for it, and something took off very fast.  He ran after it as hard as he could, and he began to catch up to it.  He ran and it ran, he still could not see what it was, it was too short and the tall grass covered it.  But he ran after the movement, until finally it began to slow, and he overtook it.

But there was nothing there.  He kicked and pawed through the grass, knowing it must be very near, though at least a little part of him thought that it probably didn’t have his bag.  He would have seen it.  But he didn’t stop looking, until finally he had stomped all the grass flat in a wide circle, and found nothing at all.  He sat down in the circle, too tired and upset to do more than stare blankly ahead, not even yet wondering what he would do.  And then he saw a man on a horse that he hadn’t seen before.  He was near the tree line, and the man was staring at the boy.  He had the bag, and he did not let it go or set it down.  Instead he waved at the boy, and turned his horse, and they walked into the trees.

The boy was stunned.  Where had the man come from, and how had he taken the bag?  Had he caused the grass to move, he wondered, and if so, how?  Why would a man on a horse steal a bag worth so little?  Surely he had his own tinderbox and fishing line, the boy thought to himself.  He couldn’t have needed mine.  Without hope of recovering his belongings, but with nowhere else to go, the boy stood from the circle and began to walk back down the path, toward the trees, where the man had gone in.

It was dark among the trees, darker than the forests at home.  It was quiet, too, birds weren’t calling or singing, he didn’t see any movement among the branches.  There was the smell of moisture, though the little stream did not seem to be enough to cause it.  And soon, the stream turned more to mud than water, and he looked about, and on both sides of the trail was bog, and misty swamp.  The path was raised above the rest, but not by much, and his shoes began to have mud caked to the bottoms.  His steps were slick and slippery, though here if he fell it would just be to the ground, and not from the side of a mountain, so he was not worried.  Not by the path, at least.  The silence and the stillness of the air felt as if it were hushed and waiting more than serene, and that worried him.  He saw no birds or squirrels, only the sometimes swish of something in the water and mud, too fast, leaving only a ripple before it was gone.

He walked until the path stopped being a path, but was just another meandering strip of mud between the trees.  He did not know when he had lost it, but suddenly he realized that his steps were sinking deeper into the bog, and though he stepped back to higher ground, that’s all it was.  He looked about him and could not find the path, seeing only muck and bog and deeper water farther out.  In the gray false light beneath these trees, he could not find the sun, and though he felt as if he knew where his steps should have been behind him, he was quickly turned around, and could not be certain which way was in and which out.  Just the smell of rotting leaves and trees, moisture making everything damp, sounds muffled and muted, the light gray and dim.

And for the first time since he set off to find his sister, he despaired.  He was lost and alone, his bag stolen, and with it his chance for any food or warmth.  He didn’t know where his sister was, and worse, he didn’t know where he was, either.  Even the dim light was beginning to fade, and though he knew evening wasn’t coming for some time yet, here beneath these trees, it would be dark much earlier than before.  He thought the stillness would drive him mad, no birdsong and no brush of wind in the grass and no trickle of the stream beside him.  He wished the hawk was here, or the old hunter, or even the man in the boat.  He wished he was not lost, and he wished it wasn’t getting darker, and he sat down in the mud and he began to cry.  He had not cried since the first night, but he cried now, afraid, damp, hungry, and alone.

Somewhere not very far away, a man and his horse stood on a raft, and another man poled the raft across the murky swamp water.  The man poling the raft seemed small, shriveled, and the man with the horse was silent.  He wore dark black clothes, and in his hand he held the boy’s pack, but absently, as if he’d all but forgotten it.  He seemed to have other, more important things, to think of.  When they reached the other side, the man in black clothes handed the boatman two coins, and he took them into his skinny hand and clasped them, putting them hastily away.  He said nothing, and the man said nothing either, but led his horse from the raft, and mounting, took the leftmost fork of a three-way pass.

The man in black rode some miles down the path, and then abruptly stopped and dismounted.  He loosely wrapped the reins about a tree branch, and patted the horse’s nose.  He looked the horse in the eyes.

“Quiet girl.  Wait here,” He said to the horse.  “I’ll be back.”

He stepped off the trail and into the woods, and though there was no marker, no sign to point the way, he walked confidently among the roots and mud, finding his steps with ease.  He walked until he arrived in a small clearing, a house of sticks, and a roof of thatch, in the center.  He walked to the door and pulled it open, ducking in.

Inside there was an old woman, white hair drawn back tightly from her face, twisted into a knot behind her head.  She wore a white dress, but hemmed in bright red, and she sat at a high-backed chair, reading from a very large book.  The man in black seemed smaller in her presence, though she was shorter than he.  He looked down at his hands, and fumbled with the bag, saying nothing.  She did not turn to look at him for some moments, absorbed in the passage she was reading.  When she finished, she pulled her glasses from her face, and set them on the open book, and turned to him, gesturing for him to come.

“You have it, then?”

He darted his eyes up, but did not let them meet hers.  “I do, ma’am.”  He extended the bag to her, and she took it from him.  She took it and dropped it on the floor behind her.  He looked surprised, and in spite of himself, asked “Do you not care to open it?”

She stood and walked toward the fire, taking a poker from the rack and pushing at a log.  “It makes no difference.  Some bits of clothing, a crust of bread, no doubt.  What we have taken from him does not matter, but that he recognize it as his own.  I need only for him to have reason to mistrust.”

“I don’t understand.  I thought you aimed to help the boy?”

She looked back at him, her eyes sharp.  “It is not important that you understand.  In that one moment, he must act without trust, without guidance, without hope of salvation.  That is all.”

The man in black looked at the fire, and thought that he was right to be wary of the old woman.  She frightened him.  But he nodded, and said “Is there anything more?”

“No.  I will find the boy tonight, just after the sun has gone down.  Tell the boatman to wait for me, I will require his assistance to cross.”

He nodded, and began to back toward the door.  “Yes, ma’am.”

It would be very dark soon.  The boy had tried to climb a few trees, in hopes that perhaps they would be more inviting than falling asleep in the muck.  His boots were too slick with mud to gain much traction though, and he could not peer very far into the dark limbs to see if it was safe.  There could be snakes and spiders in the trees, and he would not know until he had gotten too far up.  Cold and afraid, he sat down at the base of a tree that was higher than the others, just a little, and a bit less wet about the trunk.  He wrapped his arms around himself, hungry, and afraid of sleeping in the swamp.

It had not been long when he saw the twinkling of a light in the distance.  At first he thought it must be a bug, or a trick of his eyes.  But soon he could tell that it was drawing ever nearer him, and he could hear the sound of footsteps, muffled, but certain.  He thought perhaps it was the man in black, and he ducked behind the tree, and watched the light carefully.  The light drew nearer, and suddenly someone started singing softly to themselves.  It was the sound of a woman’s voice, old, he thought, but pleasant.  As he watched, she broke into view, just where he had been sitting.  Her steps turned to the right, and she seemed to be walking intently.  She had long white hair flowing down over her brown dress.  He thought to himself that this was just as he had imagined the healers to be, and his heart leapt that this would be someone who might help him find his sister.  His fear for himself dissolved, and he stood out from behind the tree, and called to her.

“Excuse me.”

The old woman jumped, startled, and whirled about, her lantern twisting in her hand and casting strange lights everywhere.  “Who’s there!?” she called out.

The boy stood forward from the tree further, and said, “I am.”

The old woman looked at him, and seemed perplexed.  “You?  But how did you get out here, boy?  Where did you come from?”

The boy said “I came across the mountains, looking for the healers they say live in this swamp.  They say my sister was taken to one of them.”

“All on your own?” the old woman said, incredulously.

“Yes, ma’am.”  The boy thought that he could have mentioned the old man’s help, and that of the hawk, but thought that she didn’t really mean that.

“How, little one?  You have no food, that I can see, no supplies.  How could you have made it across the mountains, and from there across the grasslands, to find your way here?”

The boy looked down, sadly, and said “Until this morning, I had fishing hooks and a knife and a tinderbox and a blanket.”  He paused and looked up.  “But a man came and he stole it from me, and now I have nothing at all.”

The old woman sighed gently and walked to the boy, and put a hand on his shoulder.  “Don’t worry, little one.  We will find you new things.  Maybe I can help you find your sister.”

The boy’s face brightened, and he looked up at her.  “Oh, yes, please.  That is why I have walked all this way.”

The old woman nodded, and took him by the hand.  “Come, then.  My errands can wait.  Come to my home with me, and we will eat, and you can tell me of your sister and your journey.  And we will see what we can do.”

The old woman had brought him to her home, and she had fed him, and given him fresh clothes.  From her grandson, when he was a boy much the same, she had said.  They seemed very new, the boy thought, but he was glad of them.  He had not worn clean clothes in a long time now.  The feel of soft clothes and the gentle light of the fire dancing about the room made him content, even happy.  He missed his sister, but he was on his way to her, and his heart was light in his chest to have found someone at long last who might help him find her.

“It is the most terrible thing, to be alone,” the old woman said as she put a second warm mug of cider in front of the boy.  “I am very sorry for you.”

The boy looked about her little cottage, one that looked as if no one but she had seen its insides for years and years, and he looked at the woman.  “Are you often lonely, ma’am?”

The old woman stopped for a moment, as if surprised.  She regained herself quickly, and sat down in a rocking chair by the fire, and beckoned him to come to her.  “Sit with me, child.  You are a wise little one, aren’t you?”

The boy shrugged, but he supposed he may be.  He was not sure how to tell.  He took his mug and in his clean and comfortable clothes moved from the bench by the table to a rug on the floor.  He sat with his back to the fire and it was wonderfully warm, and they sat together, the boy looking up at her old and wrinkled face.  She looked into the flickering flames, and for a while did not speak.  When she did, her voice was lower, and she seemed tired, or sad.

“I am often lonely, here.  It is often that way when you get to be my age.  Everyone you know has died, and long life has become as much a curse as a blessing.”  The boy listened, but did not know what to say.  “In the end,” she continued, “it is enough to know you have lived a full life, done as much good as you could.  That is perhaps all that is left, but it must be enough.”  Her eyes lifted from the flames, and she smiled, with a little laugh.  “It is certainly not something I can change.  But, let us speak of what we possibly can.  Tell me about your sister.”

The boy sat up alertly, and set his mug down beside him.  “Yes, please.  Are you a healer, like the people in the village said?”

She smiled.  “I am a kind of healer, yes.  Of the spirit, more than the body, though I suppose I could tie a splint in a pinch.”

The boy did not know what she meant, but he was very happy to hear that she was a healer, and that his trip had not been in vain.  “I have come across the mountains to find you.  They said that the man who took my sister was coming to find you, or someone like you, to help her.”

“Oh, there aren’t many like me, little one.  And the few of us that remain are not so easy to find, but that we wish it.”

The boy thought that was likely true.  No one could find anything in this swamp, unless you knew it was there already.  He was quiet for a few moments.  He felt he knew the answer already, but decided to ask, “It was not to you that the man brought my sister?”

The old woman shook her head.  “I am sorry child.  It was not.  But that does not mean we cannot find her.”

The boy wrinkled his brow.  “Did someone tell you where she is?”

She smiled, “No.  But there are those that have seen her.  Eyes that have witnessed her passing.  And those eyes have, no doubt, gazed into the flames of a fire, or a mirror, or water, since then.  When we look into these things, they look back.  They remember.  And as all fire is one fire, and all water is one water, and all mirrors show the same reflected world; so too might we follow your sister’s path in them.”

“I do not understand.  There are many different fires, I have seen them.  I have seen my own fires on my journey burn bright and then, well before dawn, grow dim and go out.  I have seen lakes and rivers and streams, but they are not all one, and mirrors alike might belong to many people.  They are not all the same, and they do not speak, they do not remember, they have no eyes by which they might see, no thought by which they might know.”

“A philosopher, are you child?  But they are all one, as man is all one, as woman is all one, as the forest here is the forest all the world over.  The sky is all one sky, though we gaze upon it from where we stand beneath, and every life is born and lives and returns to the earth, though we may see them in their comings and goings at seeming different times.  No, my young child, they are one, and they do see, and they do remember.  Do you think your little flame forgot you when it passed, or that this one looking now upon you does not know your name?  Should you drink a cupped hand of water, did your reflection not splash in its eyes, and will it not know you when its brothers and sisters who are itself shall gaze upon you next?  Will it not greet you with a laugh as it spills over rocks and bubbles around bends of the bank?  Is it not that the flame loves you that it warms you so well, and that if allowed it might take you to itself completely?”

“I do not know” the boy admitted, though it seemed strange and unlikely to him.  He had seen one stream end and another begin, and he knew that this marsh and bog was not the same as either of them.  The fire that had been difficult to light on nights alone did not seem the same as this one merrily flickering here.  But he could not think of how to argue this to the old woman, for she seemed so certain of what she knew.

She could see that it was troubling him, and she smiled.  “Do not worry yourself, little one.  There is much to learn for both of us, and you are right enough in your way.  It is only that I am right, in mine.”

The boy nodded, thinking that this was an answer he could accept.  “If the fire knows, then how can we ask it?” he said to the old woman.  She picked up a poker and shifted a log on the fire, that the flames leapt up again a little higher.

“As we might ask any other thing a question of such magnitude.  With great seriousness and clarity of purpose.  The words we use do not matter, but that we ask truly, with our need our single focus.”

The old woman was quiet for a time, and then she yawned.  “I am tired, child, and must rest.  You should stay for a while, here by the hearth.  Take your time, and ask the fire.  We will discuss what you asked, and what you were answered, in the morning.”  She stood and replaced the poker, and placed a blanket and a pillow for him on the rug where he sat.  “When you are tired, sleep.  I will wake you when it is morning.”  She walked from the room with a candle in hand, and after a few moments, the boy saw it go dark from her room.  He turned back to face the fire, and looked deep into the flames.

“Fire,” the boy said quietly.  He felt silly, and did not want to be overheard.  “If you can hear me, I need to know where my sister is.  I miss her, and she is hurt, and I do not know if anyone tends to her.  Have you seen her, fire, with your many flashing eyes?  Has one seen her who has then looked upon you?  If you can find her, if you can tell me where she has been, please, show me now.”  As the boy spoke, his intensity grew.  He forgot feeling silly, and forgot that fire has no words to answer.  He leaned forward, his face close to the flames, the heat on his face, and his voice grew lower and quieter, though now it was as a fervent prayer more than a childish indulgence he would hide.  “I will give what must be given, fire.  I will do what must be done, and will follow where you lead.  Help me.  Show me the way to my sister.”

The fire crackled, and it danced, and it seemed to listen.  The boy stared into it intently, waiting for the flames to somehow answer, though in what way he did not know.  He stared until his eyes were dry, and his face was hot, and he began to grow tired.  The fire dimmed, the flames lower.  He pulled the pillow and the blanket near him, and put his head down, and watched the fire with closing eyes.  It was beginning to whisper to him, in little crackling sounds, and he did his best to stay awake to hear and see, but it was a soft and soothing sound, and soon he was asleep.

But in his sleep the crackling sound did not stop.  The light in the room grew darker, the embers red behind his closed eyes, and he began to dream.  At first he dreamt only of the bog, looking into green-black mud puddles, and the swish and slither of things just out of sight.  He dreamt of trees that were dark and threatening, so unlike his trees at home.  Slowly though the oppressiveness seemed to give way, and he began to see lizards and frogs and snakes and birds.  He saw bits of light creeping through the mist, and saw that things did bloom here too, in delicate lavender and pale white flowers, buds that belied the blackness of tree-barks and the tangles of vines.  But as he looked, he heard a sound, and in the manner of a dream, he was now running, and before him was a terrible enemy, something crawling like a serpent, but it was many things, some with hooked beaks and others with fangs, he could see bodies of slick black, and the ripple of leathery skin and muscle.  There were uncanny sounds from all about him, and he ran, but he ran toward the dark army, into the shadows of teeth and eyes.  He did not want to and he struggled to turn back, to slow his steps, but there was no stopping, and he looked down, and in his hand there was a candle.  And suddenly he knew it was the candle that was leading him toward these things, and he tried to blow it out, to make it stop, but it danced atop the wick, and pulled him ever forward.  Through the shadows he ran, cold and hard hands lashed out to snatch at him, and leering faces bellowed terrible laughter at him from the darkness behind the trees.  Things slithered across his path, and voices called out to him by name.  He ran and he ran, and though he did not wish to be here, he now ran as the candle pulled, hoping perhaps it would lead him through this, though it had led him in.

And then everything stopped, and his pace pulled up short.  He had entered a clearing, where in the center was a tiny mirrored pool.  No trees crowded its surface with reflection, nothing but the sky and stars overhead.  The boy tried to stop and look, but the candle urged him onward and toward it.  It, however, would go no further, and was suddenly sitting on a rock behind the boy.  He turned around to pick it up, but it would not lift, as if fastened to the place.  The candle was still, it did not flicker or wave, and the boy turned and went to the pool.  He drew to the side, and he knelt down before it, and he looked at the surface.  At first it was just his face, reflected back to him.  But soon his face changed and he saw it as it was growing older.  He was a boy no more, but a young man.  And soon a grown man, with a beard and a scar above his eye.  And soon after that he was old, and he put his hand to his face for it had withered with time, and his hair had gone long and white.  And from behind his face now came a shadow, and it covered his shoulders and his hair, and it, like a cloth, wrapped about his throat, until there was nothing but the aged face left in the mirrored lake, and that too began to grow dim.  And then there was nothing but starlight once again.  He watched, and for a very long time, there was nothing but silence.  And then, slowly, movement began, just in the dark places between the stars.  As if great serpents writhed between them, there were strange shapes that coiled and curled between the stars in the pool, and colors began to flicker over their bodies.  And he saw sand dunes at night, with stars overhead, and he saw smoke from a campfire.  He saw a man with a torch casting light on red cave walls, walls with strange drawings and figures marked on.  He saw a beautiful plant growing from a small seed, pendulous flowers brilliant in moonlight.  He saw a girl who was sleeping and could not wake up, and he saw in her hands a book for sleeping eyes to read.  And the candle called him back, and he sat from the pool with a start.  He looked again, but there were only stars.  He stood and he went to the candle, and it would lift easily now, and it flickered in a new breeze.  And on it lead him, but he dreamt no more, and for the rest of the night he slept undisturbed.